For thousands who lived in and around the bustling coastal town of Kandla in Gujarat, June 9, 1998 started as an ordinary day. By mid-morning, some were perplexed to see the sky suddenly turn dark and strong winds howl around. June typically is a month characterised by a spotless sky in this part of the world, known for its vast treeless salt pans.

In the next six hours, it did not just rain in Kandla but literally poured. Soon the floodwaters surged vast areas inhabited by salt and port workers. As water levels rose, people shifted to higher spots.

Jayanthibhai, a salt worker, was one of them. He, his family and 28 others climbed on to the roof of his two-storey house with a hope to escape the fury of the floodwaters. By then, tides as high as 25 feet were slapping the town.

One such tide slammed into his house and the building came down like a crumbling block. Jayanthibhai escaped. He held on to a pillar but was shattered to see his wife, two daughters and others swept away. "It was worse than the curse of Durvasa [a mythical sage who pronounced calamitous curses]," a 1998 report in India Today magazine quotes Jayanthibhai as saying.

Elsewhere in Kandla, the picture of death and destruction was no different. The town was full of dead bodies and the stench was nauseating.


Every now and then loaded trucks were dumping bodies at hospitals which had to turn their lobbies and waiting halls into temporary mortuaries. Outside, mass pyres were being lit around the town to handle countless decayed bodies.
At the Kandla port, 15 ships reportedly sank. Such was the scale of destruction that violent waves and strong winds scooped two ships and tossed them onto National Highway 8A.

Not just Kandla, but even towns like Jamnagar, Junagadh and Rajkot bore a similar picture of misery and helplessness. The exact number of houses collapsed, shanties washed away, vehicles swept and other infrastructure destroyed remains unknown.
When this happened on June 9, the BJP-led state government, despite advance warnings, was sleeping peacefully. It chose to do nothing. The people were totally unaware of what was heading their way. They were left to fend for themselves when it started raining cats and dogs, and the maddening sea rushed towards them.
Since June 4, 1998 the India Meteorological Department (IMD) had been monitoring the cyclone over the Arabian Sea. At 12:30 pm on June 7, the IMD issued a warning saying a very severe cyclone was approaching Gujarat, specifically for the Saurashtra and Kutch coastline, which includes Kandla.

Next morning, the IMD issued another danger signal, this time for Kandla port. But the government remained unconcerned and indifferent. Help arrived when thousands had died -- thousands who could have been easily evacuated and saved.
Unlike today, 1998 was an era when television had limited reach and news channels were barely existed. The common people had literally no clue about the approaching cyclone and its destructive potential.

Official figures put the death toll as 1,173 and 1,774 people missing. But media reports, eyewitness and volunteer accounts from 1998 suggest that this was grossly an understatement of the ground reality. India Today magazine's reports from 1998 say at least 4,000 people had died and countless went missing as bodies were washed to the sea.

Government estimate of destruction for Kandla alone was Rs 18,55,38,00,000 (Rs 1,855.33 crore).

After the devastation, the then BJP government came up with a baffling defence to justify its inaction. "The land the victims were living on belonged to the Kandla Port Trust and its authorities should have issued the warnings," state Industry Minister and former Chief Minister Suresh Mehta told India Today magazine after the storm in 1998. "The Government took adequate measures within its own limits, wherever it had been warned," he had explained.

Such was the callousness that within a month of the tragedy, the Keshubhai Patel government, that was begging for central grants and help from NGOs, ordered Cielo cars for its 30 ministers.